It's time for
a very important conceptual aside.
This is, by value versus by reference, and
understanding this concept
will be important.
Not only for your Java script development
skills, and debugging skills,
but also for some important things we're
going to talk about in just a bit.
So let's explain what we mean when
we say by value and by reference.
In both cases,
we're talking about variables.
So let's say I have a primitive value.
One of those primitive types,
a number, or a bullion, or a string.
And, I've set a variable equal to it.
So, now that variable, let's say a,
has an address location,
where it knows where that
primitive value sits, in memory.
Remember, we said that the reference
is really to a location in memory.
And let's suppose then I run b = a.
I set up a new variable,
and it's equal to a.
Or maybe I pass a to a function, and
the parameter name, and the function is b.
If it's a primitive value in JavaScript,
this is what happens.
B, the new variable,
points to a new address.
A new location in memory.
And a copy of the primitive value
is placed into that spot in memory.
So if a is 3, it sits in one address.
One location in memory.
B then also, will point to 3 for
the copy, a separate location,
in memory,
that has been filled with that same value.
This approach is called by value.
I'm passing, or referencing, or
setting equal one value to another,
by copying the value.
These two variables become the same,
by copying the value into two
separate spots in memory.
Make sense?
Now, if i have an object in JavaScript,
and this goes for all objects,
that includes functions which
are special types of objects and others.
When I set a variable equal to an object,
I still get a location,
an address in memory that it
knows where that object lives.
And that's how I reference it.
But when b is set equal to a,
when I'm essentially
trying to get those two to be the same
value, or I pass a to a function,
that new variable b, instead of
getting a new location in memory,
simply points to the same
location in memory that a does.
No new object is created.
No copy of the object is created.
Instead, two names point
to the same address.
This would like if you had two names,
an alias.
And yet, both of those names,
it doesn't matter because you
still live in the same place.
In this way, both a and
b, have the same value,
because when you ask them what their value
is, they look at the same place in memory.
This is called by reference.
And by reference behaves quite
differently from by value.
It's important to understand that
all objects interact by reference,
when sending them equal to each other,
or passing to a function.
And this can cause problems
if you don't understand this,
weird problems that can be hard to debug.
But once you do understand it,
it becomes quite clear.
All right.
Let's look at some examples.
All right,
first let's talk about by value.
And we're talking about primitive
types in JavaScript, so
I'll just put a comment here.
And let's create two variables.
I'll create a variable a, which I'll
set equal to 3, and a variable b,
which I won't set equal to anything,
and then I'll set b equal to a.
So, at this point, what should happen?
Well, you can guess, that a will be 3,
and b will be 3 as well.
But remember, this is by value,
because 3 is a primitive type, a number.
The same would be true with any of the
other primitive types that we discussed.
So when b is set equal to a,
the equal's operator,
seeing that these are primitive types,
creates a new spot in memory for b,
copies that value from a, and sets it
to that value that b is looking at.
So b will be 3, and a will be 3, but
they will be copies of each other,
sitting in two spots in memory.
That means that, after the fact,
I can change a, and it doesn't affect b.
Because they're two
different spots in memory.
This line copied them, but
after that they're on their own.
So let's run this.
And what I should see, is what?
What do you think I should see here?
Knowing that these are two
separate copies in memory.
Well a is equal to 2, what will b be?
B, its value is 3.
And that makes sense,
because b was just a copy of a.
It has its own space in memory.
So when I changed a,
it didn't have any impact on b at all.
That's by value.
Next is by reference.
So, I'll put a comma in here, so we can
separate these, and that's all objects.
That includes functions.
So, this is the behavior in Java
script for any type of object.
So, I'll do a new variable c,
I'll use object literal syntax to
create a name, and value pair.
And then a second variable,
and I'll do the same thing.
I'll set d equal to c.
Now, what's happened at this point,
at this line of code?
The equals operator sees
that these are objects.
And so, rather than setting
up d with a new memory space.
It simply points d at the same address,
at the same location in memory,
that c points to.
So if I was to output these two,
you'd see the same value, but
they aren't copies of each other.
They're simply pointing to
the same spot in memory.
That means, if I mutate C,
lets say I change its dot
greeting equal to hello,
because now that I've got my object
setup I can use the dot operator, and
say hello, and I'll mutate it, oh.
Oh yeah, wait a second.
Big word alert.
Yeah, this is another one of those
words that computer scientists decide
to use that's way more complicated
sounding then it really is.
All right.
Mutate.
To change something.
I know, right?
That's all it means.
And if you read up on any
deep Java Strip subjects,
you'll probably hear this word,
mutate an object.
Mutate a value.
It just means change it.
That's literally all it means.
And you'll also see the phrase immutable,
which simply means that
it can't be changed.
But that's a subject for another course.
Mutate means to change something.
So when I say, I mutate my object,
that really means I'm changing it.
Maybe adding a property,
removing a property,
changing a value of a property,
and mutate it.
All right.
So, here I've mutated my object.
That is, I have an object in memory,
with a property called greeting,
whose value is hi, and
I change that properties value to hello.
I mutate it.
So now, I'm going to console dot log d or
c, and then d.
Let's do that.
What do you expect to see here?
Remember that when you set values equal
to each other, when it comes to objects,
you're simply pointing the two variable
names at the same location in memory.
I have an object with a name value
pair greeting, initially hi,
and that's what it is
when d is set equal to c.
And then I use c to change
the value of that property.
So what am I going to see
when I output these two?
Well, I see hello for
c, and hello for d.
Does that surprise you?
Well it shouldn't,
understanding how this works.
They're simply both pointing to
the same location in memory.
So if I change the value of that object,
if I change,
if I mutate that object, it doesn't
matter which variable name I use,
these are just aliases, for
all intents and purposes.
I'm saying,
at this memory location that C points to,
change the greeting property
of that object to hello.
And then, when I go ask to look at d, d is
pointing at that same location in memory.
And it's been changed.
So these are the same.
So, with by reference, objects,
since they're set equal to
each other by reference, once you change
one, you change the other, or all of them.
If I had more variables set equal to c or
d, they would all change,
no matter which one I used to change it.
Because they all would be pointing,
at the same location and memory.
The same thing happens when I
do parameters to functions.
So, even as parameters,
objects are passed by reference,
primitives by value but
objects by reference.
So, let's say, I write a new
function called changeGreeting.
I'll just call it, obj for object.
And I'll expect that it
has a greeting property.
And I'll set it equal to Hola.
So here again, I'm mutating that object.
So I have this d variable.
It's pointing at the same
memory space as c.
Now it's set equal to hello.
So, this time I'll call changeGreeting,
and
I'll pass d to this function.
So d will be passed to here,
that will be what obj is.
And then I mutate it.
So let's output c and d.
What do you expect to see?
We understand that just like equals,
passing an object to
a function means they're being
passed by reference, not by value.
So, obj will simply point to
the same memory location as d, and
d already points to the same
memory location as c.
So when this is mutated, meaning go
update that object sitting there in that
memory location, and
I go output these, there we go.
Hola for both c and d.
Because I've mutated the value
in that particular memory space.
Again, by reference.
Now, one other thing to note, the equals
operator sets up new memory space.
That is a new address in memory.
So, if I set c equal to
an equivalent object, but
I give it a different value, say howdy,
and then I'll just copy, paste these.
I copy and paste c and d.
This equals, in this case,
I'm setting c equal to a new value.
And so, the equals operator is going to,
in this case,
set up a brand new memory space for
c, and put this value in it.
So, d and c, will no longer be pointing,
to the same location and memory.
So, I get howdy, and d is still
pointing at the spot that said hola.
So, this is a special case,
where my reference doesn't really apply,
because the equals operator saw that these
aren't a preexisting location in memory.
This is a brand new object being created
on the fly, by this object literal syntax.
So, since it saw that its second parameter
wasn't an object that already existed
in memory, it had to set up a spot
in memory for this to live.
So, it set up that spot in memory for
this to live, and then pointed c at it.
In the earlier case, where I set
d equal to c, c already existed.
So the equals operator said, oh,
this already exists in memory.
It's an object, so
I'll just point d to that same location.
But again, here,
this didn't exist in memory yet.
It added it, and then pointed c there.
So c is pointing now to
a different spot in memory then d.
So that's the exception there.
Again, it's important for
you to understand the difference
between by value, and by reference.
In some programming languages,
you can actually
decide whether something is passed by
value or reference, with your code syntax.
But in JavaScript you
don't have that option.
All primitive types are by value,
and all objects are by reference.
This can cause some errors and
bugs that are hard to track down,
if you don't understand this.
But once you do, once you understand
that if you're using objects,
they're being mutated,
then all the objects, all the variables,
that point to that same object,
are going to get that change.
Going to see that change, cuz they're
just pointing at the same memory space.
You'll understand, if maybe,
you accidentally mutated an object,
that you didn't mean to.
Because maybe you passed the object
by reference, and didn't realize it.
On the other hand, maybe you intended to
change a primitive type, but you didn't
change the original value, because
it was being passed around by value.
All right so, take a look at this code.
It's provided for you to download.
Or try typing it out yourself.
Try messing around with it a bit.
Understand all of these scenarios.
This will help you greatly in debugging
your own JavaScript code, and
providing you some interesting
options in the code that you write.
And will also help you
understand some things we'll see
just a little bit later in the course.
So that's by value, and by reference.